Book: Principles & Techniques in Combinatorics

* Keywords: Pairwise disjoint, k-ary sequence of size n, r-permutation 
List of problems:
1.1.1. One can reach city Q from city P by sea, air and road. Suppose that there are 2 ways by sea, 3 ways by air and 2 ways by road. What are the total number of ways from P to Q by sea, air or road?
1.1.2. Find the number of ordered pairs (x,y) of integers such that x^2 + y^2 <= 5.
1.1.3. To reach city D from city A, one has to pass through city B and then C. If there are 2 ways to travel from A to B, 5 ways from B to C, and 3 ways from C to D. What are the total number of ways from A to D via B and C?
1.1.4. For a given k, n from N, how many different k-ary sequences of length n can we form? In other words, what is the size of the set containing all the k-ary sequences of length n?
1.1.5. Find the number of positive divisors of 600, inclusive of 1 to 600 itself.
1.1.6. Let X = {1,2,...,100} and let S = {(a,b,c) | a,b,c from X, a<b and a<c}. Find |S|. Solve the same problem when (a<b<c).
1.2.1. Let A = {a,b,c,d}. Find all the 3-permutations of A.
1.2.2. Let E = {a,b,c,...,x,y,z} be the set of the 26 English alphabets. Find the number of 5-letter words that can be formed from E such that the first and last letters are distinct vowels and the remaining three are distinct consonants.
1.2.3. There are 7 boys and 3 girls in a gathering.  In how many ways can they be arranged in a row so that (i) the 3 girls form a single block (i.e. there is no boy between any two of the girls)? (ii) the two end-positions are occupied by boys and no girls are adjacent?
1.2.4. Between 20000 and 70000, find the number of even integers in which no digit is repeated.
1.2.5. Let S be the set of natural numbers whose digits are chosen from {1,3,5,7} such that no digits are repeated. Find (i) |S| (ii) Summation(n) over all the set S.

Chapter5: Permutations&Combinations(IITJEE)

Illustration 2: A hall has 12 gates. In how many ways, can a man enter the hall through one gate and come out through a different gate.
Illustration 3: How many numbers between 10 and 10,000 can be formed by using the digits 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 if (i) no digit is repeated in any number. (ii) digits can be repeated.
Illustration 4: Find the sum of n terms of the series whose nth term is n!×n.
Illustration 5: If 56Pr+6 : 54Pr+3 = 30800 : 1, find rP2.
Illustration 6: Three men have 4 coats, 5 waist coats and 6 caps. In how many ways can they wear them?
Illustration 7: Suppose 8 people enter an event in a swim meet. In how many ways could the gold, silver, and bronze prizes be awarded?
Illustration 8: A student appears in an objective test which contains 10 multiple choice questions. Each question has four choices in which one is the correct option. What maximum number of different answers can the student give? How will the answer change if each question may have more than one correct answers?

"The m^n or n^m dilemma"
    Let us start with an example.
    Q. There are 7 letters and 5 letter-boxes. In how many ways can you put the letters in the boxes?
    Sol: This is the typically confusing question asked frequently from the P & C area. Let’s see how you can
    solve this type of question.
    The Exhaustive Approach: One way to solve this question is through (what we will call) The Exhaustive
    Approach. While solving such problems, first decide which of the items (letters and letter-boxes here) is
    exhaustive. Exhaustive here means the entity which is sure to be used up completely.
    In this example, all the “letters” are sure to be placed in the boxes, whereas there is no such constraint as
    regards the “letter-boxes”. Some boxes could go empty. Having decided this, just go by the options we
    have for all the instances of the exhaustive item and you have your answer.
    As you can see here, every letter has 5 boxes to choose from. Thus the total would
    be (5 x 5 x........7 times) = (57)
    A similar question could be: In how many ways can 10 rings be worn on 5 fingers? Try it yourself.

Illustration 9: Determine the number of permutations of the letters of the word ‘SIMPLETION’ taken all at a time.
Illustration 10: Find the numbers between 300 and 3000 that can be formed with the digits 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, where no digit is repeated in any number.
Illustration 11: How many words can be formed from the letters of the word ARTICLE, so that vowels occupy the even places?
Illustration 12: How many different words can be formed with the letters of the word ORDINATE so that (a) Four vowels occupy the odd places (b) Beginning with O (c) Beginning with O and ending with E.
Illustration 13: Find the number of ways in which 5 boys and 5 girls can be seated in a row so that (a) No two girls may sit together (b) All the girls sit together and all the boys sit together (c) All the girls are never together.
Illustration 15: There are 21 balls which are either white or black and the balls of same color are alike. Find the number of white balls so that, the number of arrangements of these balls in a row is maximum.
Illustration 16: The number plates of cars must contain 3 letters of the alphabet denoting the place and area to which its owner belongs. This is to be followed by a three-digit number. How many different number plates can be formed if: (i) Repetition of letters and digits is not allowed (ii) Repetition of letters and digits is allowed.
Q. In how many ways can the word VARIETY be arranged so that exactly 2 vowels are together?
